---
title: "Advent of Code 2023 - Day 1"
excerpt: "Fixing the calibration document"
header:
    image: assets/images/AOC_2023/AOC_2023_Day1.jpg
    teaser: assets/images/AOC_2023/AOC_2023_Day1.jpg
toc: true
published: true
toc_label: "Contents:"
classes: wide
tags:
 - Puzzle
---

{% include mathjax.html %}

## Intro
The [Advent of Code](https://adventofcode.com/2023) is a yearly series of puzzles run during the month of December. The daily puzzles are the same for all players but puzzle inputs are randomly generated for each user account (to stop cheating!). The solutions outlined in this blog series are designed to intake any puzzle input and output the correct answer. 

## Part 1

In the first part of [the puzzle](https://adventofcode.com/2023/day/1), we are given a collection of words containing lower case letters and numbers. Each word is guaranteed to have at least one digit. For each word, we must find the first and last digits (which may be the same character), and form a two digit number from them; the final answer is the sum of these numbers.

To approach this problem, we're going to loop through each letter in the word and return those which are numbers. We can use a helpful string method `.isdigit()` which returns `True` if the string passed to it is a number. We'll store anything that returns True in a list. This is useful for the next step, as we can access the first `[0]` and last digits `[-1]` through their respective indexes. Finally, we'll add the two digit number this creates to the running total and provide the final sum as the outputted answer.  

```python
def numbers_only(puzzle):
    running_total = 0
    for word in puzzle:
        numbers_in_string = ([letter for letter in word if letter.isdigit()])
        running_total += int(numbers_in_string[0] + numbers_in_string[-1])
    return running_total

print(numbers_only(puzzle))
```



    54388



## Part 2

In the second part of this puzzle, we need to not only look for digits, but also for spelled out numbers (e.g. 'one', 'two', 'three' etc.) at the start and end of the words. To help with this, we'll define a dict mapping each number string to the corresponding integer:

```python
NUMBERS = {'one': 1,
           'two': 2,
           'three': 3,
           'four': 4,
           'five': 5,
           'six': 6,
           'seven': 7,
           'eight': 8,
           'nine': 9}
```

In Part 1 we wrote a function that extracted and summed the digits from each word. If we can turn the written numbers into numerical digits we can pass it back through the first function. 

We can utilise the same technique as before and loop through each word but this time we'll search for written numbers. If we find a written number we'll replace it with its dict value. This sounds straight forward, however, there are cases where written numbers are combined, such as `oneeight` or `eightwo`. Working through the words from start to end mean we risk missing some numbers and ending up with `1ight` or `8we`. To avoid this, rather than replacing the whole written number we'll insert the digit after the first letter. This will give us `o1ne8ight` or `e8ight2wo` and avoid missing any conversions. 

```python
def written_to_nums(puzzle):
    number_dict = {"one": 1, "two": 2, "three": 3, "four": 4, "five": 5, "six": 6, "seven": 7, "eight": 8, "nine": 9}
    new_puzzle = []
    for word in puzzle:
        for number in number_dict:
            for j in range(len(word)):
                if word[j:j+len(number)] == number:
                    word = word[:j+1] + str(number_dict[number]) + word[j+1:]
        new_puzzle.append(word)
    return new_puzzle
```

Testing these functions on the first few words from the provided dataset, we can see that they give the desired results:

```python
test = written_to_nums(puzzle)

for i in range(5):
    print(f'{puzzle[i]}\n{test[i]}\n')
```
    threehqv2
    t3hreehqv2
    
    sxoneightoneckk9ldctxxnffqnzmjqvj
    sxo1ne8ighto1neckk9ldctxxnffqnzmjqvj
    
    1hggcqcstgpmg26lzxtltcgg
    1hggcqcstgpmg26lzxtltcgg
    
    nrhoneightkmrjkd7fivesixklvvfnmhsldrc
    nrho1ne8ightkmrjkd7f5ives6ixklvvfnmhsldrc
    
    zhlzhrkljonephkgdzsnlglmxvprlh6n
    zhlzhrkljo1nephkgdzsnlglmxvprlh6n
For the answer to Part 2, we can run both functions in one line:

```python
print(numbers_only(written_to_nums(puzzle)))

53515
```









❄️ [Back to Advent of Code 2023 solutions homepage](../Advent_of_code_2023) ❄️
